Additional 'keycloak' authorization documentation (#3989)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: documentation/modules/oauth/con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services.adoc

// Module included in the following module:
//
// proc-oauth-authorization-broker-config.adoc

[id='con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-authorization-services_{context}']

> = Manage policies and permissions in Keycloak Authorization Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Managing policies and permissions in Keycloak Authorization Services
```

Reviewer: Could we introduce this chapter with a line to say what we'll be looking at and why? "To use Keycloak with Strimzi, Keycloak Authorization Services must be mapped to Kafka's authorization model so that all possible Kafka permissions and resources are represented in Keycloak authorization scopes and policies."  Or similar.

> == Kafka Authorization Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Kafka authorization model
```

> The link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#security_authz_primitives[Kafka authorization model] defines resource types, and permissions available for each type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The link:https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#security_authz_primitives[Kafka authorization model] defines resource types, and the permissions available for each type.
```

> Whenever some action is performed by the Kafka client, one or more permissions are checked by the broker (depending on the action performed) using the configured authorizer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whenever an action is performed by the Kafka client, permissions are checked by the broker (depending on the action performed) using the configured authorizer.
```

Reviewer: I think I would make this the first sentence...

When an action is performed by a Kafka client on a broker, the broker uses a configured authorizer to check permissions (depending on the action performed). The Kafka authorization model defines resource types, and permissions available for each type.

> There are five resource types: `Topic`, `Group`, `Cluster`, `TransactionalId`, `DelegationToken`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kafka has five resource types for controlling access: `Topic`, `Group`, `Cluster`, `TransactionalId`, `DelegationToken`.
```

> And these are the different permissions for each resource type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> And these are the different permissions for each resource type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each resource type has different permissions:
```

Reviewer: Are these the permissions we need to capture in Keycloak Authorization Services? If so, maybe we should say that. _Permissions for each resource type, based on operations, must be captured in the Keycloak Authorization Services Model_

Reviewer: How much are we likely to have to update these lists? Would it be accurate to say something like _make sure you capture permissions for all the supported operations of each resource_?

> Topic:

Reviewer: I guess we could have all these in the config/code format `Topic`

> Topic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Topic permissions:
```

* Create
* Write
* Read
* Delete
* Describe
* DescribeConfigs
* Alter
* AlterConfigs

> Group:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Group permissions:
```

* Read
* Describe
* Delete

Cluster:

*  Create
*  Describe
*  Alter
*  DescribeConfigs
*  AlterConfigs
*  IdempotentWrite
*  ClusterAction

TransactionalId:

*  Describe
*  Write

DelegationToken:

* Describe

> 

Reviewer: additional space

Author: WDYM? A space too much and should be removed, or another space needs to be added?

Author: Removed one empty line.

> == Keycloak Authorization Services Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Keycloak Authorization Services Model for granting permissions to access resources
```

> There are four concepts used in Keycloak Authorization Services to grant permissions: `resources`, `authorization scopes`, `policies`, and `permissions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keycloak Authorization Services use four concepts to define and grant permissions: `resources`, `authorization scopes`, `policies`, and `permissions`.
```

> `Resources` are a set of resource definitions that are used to match permitted actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Resources:: Resources are a set of resource definitions that are used to match permitted actions.
```

Reviewer: S0 it looks like this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/47596553/99953976-f898fa80-2d79-11eb-9597-f8245fc9c453.png)

Reviewer: Add a plus to indent additional paragraphs

> For example, a resource can be an individual topic, or it can be a set of all topics with names that start with some prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a resource can be an individual topic, or it can be a set of all topics with names that start with the same prefix.
```

> The resource definition has a set of available `authorization scopes` associated with it. These represent a set of all actions that can be permitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resource definition has a set of available authorization scopes associated with it., which represent a set of all actions that are permitted.
```

Author: In fact the original meaning 'can be permitted' is different than the suggested meaning 'are permitted'. The idea here is not to give permissions by adding the to list, but to compose a list of available permissions for this particular resource instance. Then on the Policies tab the granting of permissions on this particualr resource instance will be limited to 'can be permitted' actions. Maybe:
```suggestion
The resource definition has a set of available authorization scopes associated with it, which represent a set of all actions available on the particular resource.
```

Often, only a subset of these actions is actually permitted.

> `Authorization scopes` is simply a set of all available actions on all the different resource types. When defining a new `resource` the `scopes` added there are taken from this set of all scopes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Authorization scopes` is simply a set of all available actions on all the different resource types. When defining a new `resource`,  `scopes` are added from the set of all scopes.
```

Reviewer: Assuming descriptions list and no code formatting on concept terms^^

> `Policies` are rules that can use various criteria to match a list of accounts. They can match service accounts based on clientId, they can match user accounts based on username, or group, or roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Policies` are rules that can use various criteria to match a list of accounts. They can match service accounts based on `clientId`, they can match user accounts based on username, or group, or roles.
```

> `Policies` are rules that can use various criteria to match a list of accounts. They can match service accounts based on clientId, they can match user accounts based on username, or group, or roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Policies` are rules that use criteria to match a list of accounts. Policies can match service accounts based on clientId,  or user accounts based on username, group, or roles.
```

Reviewer: Assuming descriptions list and no code formatting on concept terms^^

> Policies:: Policies are rules that use criteria to match a list of accounts. Policies can match service accounts based on client id, or user accounts based on username, group, or roles.

Author: A slight improvement - originally missed roles for service account targetting, making it seem as if only user accounts can be targeted with roles.

```suggestion
Policies:: Policies are rules that use criteria to match a list of accounts. Policies can match service accounts based on client id or roles, or user accounts based on username, groups, or roles.
```

> Finally, `Permissions` are used to grant a subset of `authorization scopes` on the specific `resource` definition to a set of users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Permissions:: Permissions grant a subset of authorization scopes on a specific resource definition to a set of users.
```

Reviewer: Assuming descriptions list and no code formatting on concept terms^^

> == Mapping Keycloak Authorization Services to Kafka Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Mapping the Kafka authorization model or Keycloak Authorization Services
```

Author: It sounds to me upside down to say that we're mapping Kafka model onto Keycloak model. To me that implies that the Keyloak model is fundamental and we're doing Kafka model tricks to do Keycloak things, but it's the other way around - Kafka model is fundamental and we're doing Keycloak model tricks to do Kafka things.

Reviewer: i wonder is we should introduce this section with what we're describing? _To map the Kafka authorization model to Keycloak Authorization Services, you create an OAuth 2.0 client in Keycloak that represents the Kafka broker, then define and enable Authorization Services._ Or something

Reviewer: Okay. I was suggesting based on the order of the previous sections

> In order to grant Kafka permissions to users or service accounts you have to use the Keycloak Authorization Services rules on the OAuth client that represents the Kafka Broker - typically this client has `kafka` as its clientId.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Keycloak Authorization Services rules on the OAuth client that represents the Kafka Broker to grant Kafka permissions to users or service accounts. Typically, the OAuth client has `kafka` as its client id.
```

Reviewer: i wonder if we should introduce this section with what we're describing? _To map the Kafka authorization model to Keycloak Authorization Services, you create an OAuth 2.0 client in Keycloak that represents the Kafka broker, then define and enable Authorization Services for the client. You then use the client to grant permissions to users or service accounts. Typically, the OAuth 2.0 client has `kafka` as its client ID. _ Or something.

> This client needs to have `Authorization Enabled` option activated.

Reviewer: The OAuth 2.0 client definition must have the _Authorization Enabled_ option activated.

> This client needs to have `Authorization Enabled` option activated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OAuth 2.0 client definition must have the _Authorization Enabled_ option activated.
```

> All the permissions exist within the scope of this OAuth client, which means that if you have different Kafka clusters configured with different OAuth client ids they would each have a separate set of permissions even though they are part of the same realm.

Reviewer: I guess to be consistent with the rest of the guide, we should use OAUTH **2.0** and upper case **ID** in this content.

Author: True, we're using that all over the documentation so let's be consistent ...

> All the permissions exist within the scope of this OAuth client, which means that if you have different Kafka clusters configured with different OAuth client ids they would each have a separate set of permissions even though they are part of the same realm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All permissions exist within the scope of this OAuth client, which means that if you have different Kafka clusters configured with different OAuth client IDs they would each have a separate set of permissions even though they are part of the same realm.
```

> When the Kafka client authenticates using `SASL_OAUTHBEARER` the `KeycloakRBACAuthorizer` retrieves the list of grants for the current session from the Keycloak server using the access token of the current session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Kafka client authenticates using `SASL_OAUTHBEARER`, the `KeycloakRBACAuthorizer` retrieves the list of grants for the current session from the Keycloak server using the access token of the current session.
```

Reviewer: We use _SASL OAUTHBEARER_ mechanism elsewhere in the guide. Should we use it here?

This list of grants is the result of evaluating the Keycloak Authorization Services policies and permissions.

> .Authorization scopes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Introducing authorization scopes
```

> Typically the initial configuration involves uploading the authorization scopes which creates a list of all the possible actions that can be performed on all the Kafka resource types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, an initial configuration involves uploading the authorization scopes to create a list of all the possible actions that can be performed on all the Kafka resource types.
```

> This step is performed only once, before defining any permissions. Alternatively, the authorization scopes can be added manually, but make sure to not introduce typos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This step is performed only once, before defining any permissions. Alternatively, you can add authorization scopes manually.
```

Reviewer: I think we could say the thing about typos anywhere we talk about config.

> The `authorization scopes` should simply contain all the possible Kafka permissions regardless of the resource type:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `authorization scopes` should contain all the possible Kafka permissions regardless of the resource type:
```

> * Create

Reviewer: Do we need to repeat these again?

* Write
* Read
* Delete
* Describe
* Alter
* DescribeConfig
* AlterConfig
* ClusterAction
* IdempotentWrite

> .Resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Defining resource patterns for permission checks
```

> The `resources` use pattern names to be used with pattern matching against the targeted resources when performing the permission check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `resources` use pattern names for pattern matching against the targeted resources when performing permission checks.
```

The general pattern is as follows: `RESOURCE_TYPE:NAME_PATTERN`

The resource types mirror the Kafka authorization model.
The pattern allows for the two matching options: exact matching (when the pattern does not end with `\*`), and prefix matching (when the pattern ends with `*`).

> A few examples:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example patterns for resources
```

    Topic:my-topic
    Topic:orders-*
    Group:orders-*
    Cluster:*

> In addition, the general pattern can be prefixed by another one of the format `kafka-cluster:CLUSTER_NAME`, followed by comma, where the cluster name refers to the `metadata.name` in the Kafka CR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, the general pattern can be prefixed by another in the format `kafka-cluster:CLUSTER_NAME`, followed by a comma, where the cluster name refers to the `metadata.name` in the Kafka custom resource.
```

Reviewer: _In addition_ or _alternatively_?

Author: Is there semantic difference or just a matter of how it sounds?

> For example:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Example patterns for resources with cluster prefix
```

    kafka-cluster:my-cluster,Topic:*
    kafka-cluster:*,Group:b_*

When the `kafka-cluster` prefix is not present it is assumed to be `kafka-cluster:*`.

> When the resource is defined, a list of possible authorization scopes relevant to the resource should be added to the list of scopes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a resource has been defined, you add a list of possible authorization scopes relevant to the resource to the list of scopes.
```

Set whatever actions make sense for the targeted resource type.

> While you may add any `authorization scope` to any `resource`, only the scopes supported by the resource type will ever matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While you may add any authorization scope to any resource, only the scopes supported by the resource type are considered for access control.
```

.Policies

> The `policies` are used to target permissions to one or more accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Policies are used to target permissions to one or more accounts.
```

> The targeting can refer to specific user or service accounts, it can refer to the realm roles or client roles, it can refer to user groups, and it can even use a JS rule and match client's IP address for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Targeting can refer to:
* Specific user or service accounts
* Realm roles or client roles
* User groups
* JS rule to match a client IP address
```

> Each policy can be given a name, and can be reused to target multiple permissions to multiple resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A policy is given a name, and can be reused to target multiple permissions to multiple resources.
```

> .Permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Define permissions based on policies, resources and scopes
```

> The `permissions` are the final step where you pull together the `policies`, `resources`, and `authorization scopes` to grant access to one or more users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use policies to pull together the policies, resources, and authorization scopes that grant access to users.
```

> Scope permissions should be used to grant fine-grained permissions to users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Each policy should be descriptively named in order to make it very clear what permissions it grants to which users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of the each permission should should clearly define what permissions it grants to which users.
```

> See xref:con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_str[the authorization example] to get a hands-on understanding of how to configure the permissions through Keycloak Authorization Services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how to configure permissions through Keycloak Authorization Services, see xref:con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_str[the authorization example].
```

== Permissions required by operations

> 

Reviewer: We need some context here. What are describing in this section and how it's relevant to the reader.

Author: Added the next line.

> .Creating the topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Creating a topic
```

> In order to create the topic the `Create` permission is required for the specific topic or on `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to create the topic the `Create` permission is required for the specific topic or `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.
```

> To display the details of the created topic the `Describe` permission is required for the specific topic.

Reviewer: Separate sub-section?

Author: Done.

.Producing to the topic

> In order to produce to the topic the user needs `Describe` and `Write` permissions on the topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To produce to the topic the user needs `Describe` and `Write` permissions on the topic.
```

If topic has not yet been created, and autocreation is enabled, the permissions to create the topic are required.

.Consuming from the topic

> In order to consume from the topic the user needs `Describe` and `Read` permissions on the topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To consume from the topic the user needs `Describe` and `Read` permissions on the topic.
```

Consuming from the topic normally relies on storing the consumer offsets in a consumer group.
That requires additional `Describe` and `Read` permissions on the consumer group.

> Two `resources` would be needed for matching, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two `resources` are needed for matching, for example:
```

    Topic:my-topic
    Group:my-group-*

.Producing to the topic using an idempotent producer

Besides needing the permissions for ordinary producing to the topic, an additional `IdempotentWrite` permission is required on the `Cluster` resource.

> Two `resources` would be needed for matching, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two `resources` are needed for matching, for example:
```

    Topic:my-topic
    Cluster:kafka-cluster

> .Listing the topics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Listing topics
```

> When listing the topics only the topics on which the user has `Describe` permission are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When listing topics, only the topics on which a user has `Describe` permission are returned.
```

.Displaying topic details

> The `DescribeConfigs` permission is required on the topic in order to get information like partitions, replicas, leaders ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `DescribeConfigs` permission is required on the topic to be able to retrieve information on partitions, replicas,and so on.
```

> .Listing the consumer groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Listing consumer groups
```

> When listing the consumer groups only the groups on which the user has `Describe` permissions are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When listing consumer groups, only the groups on which the user has `Describe` permissions are returned.
```

> Alternatively, if the user has `Describe` permission on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster` all the consumer groups are returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, if the user has `Describe` permission on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster`, all the consumer groups are returned.
```

.Getting the Kafka broker configuration

> Using `kafka-configs.sh` to get the broker configuration requires `Describe` permission on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to use `kafka-configs.sh` to get the broker configuration `Describe` permission is required on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.
```

> .Describing the consumer groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Describing consumer groups
```

> Using `kafka-consumer-groups.sh` to get the detailed information about all the consumer groups requires `Describe` permission on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to `kafka-consumer-groups.sh` to get detailed information about all consumer groups, `Describe` permission is required on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.
```

When defining a resource, you can associate a list of possible authorization scopes relevant to the resource.
Set whatever actions make sense for the targeted resource type.

While you may add any authorization scope to any resource, only the scopes supported by the resource type are considered for access control.

.Policies

Policies are used to target permissions to one or more accounts.
Targeting can refer to:
* Specific user or service accounts
* Realm roles or client roles
* User groups
* JS rule to match a client IP address

A policy is given a unique name, and can be reused to target multiple permissions to multiple resources.

.Defining permissions based on scopes, resources and policies 

Use fine-grained permissions to pull together the policies, resources, and authorization scopes that grant access to users.

The name of the each permission should should clearly define what permissions it grants to which users.

For more information on how to configure permissions through Keycloak Authorization Services, see xref:con-oauth-authorization-keycloak-example_str[the authorization example].

> == Permissions required by operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Example permissions required for operations on Kafka
```

> Here are a few examples which permissions are required when performing some operations on Kafka.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following  examples demonstrate the permissions required for performing common operations on Kafka.
```

.Creating a topic

To create a topic the `Create` permission is required for the specific topic or `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.

.Displaying the topic info

To display the info on the topic the `Describe` permission is required for the specific topic.

.Producing to the topic

To produce to the topic the user needs `Describe` and `Write` permissions on the topic.
If topic has not yet been created, and autocreation is enabled, the permissions to create the topic are required.

.Consuming from the topic

To consume from the topic the user needs `Describe` and `Read` permissions on the topic.
Consuming from the topic normally relies on storing the consumer offsets in a consumer group.
That requires additional `Describe` and `Read` permissions on the consumer group.

Two `resources` are needed for matching. For example:

>     Topic:my-topic
>     Group:my-group-*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
Topic:my-topic
Group:my-group-*
----    
    
   
```

* `Describe`

== Keycloak Authorization Services model for managing permissions

Keycloak Authorization Services use four concepts to define and grant permissions: _resources_, _authorization scopes_, _policies_, and _permissions_.

Resources:: Resources are a set of resource definitions that are used to match permitted actions.
For example, a resource can be an individual topic, or it can be a set of all topics with names that start with the same prefix.
The resource definition has a set of available authorization scopes associated with it, which represent a set of all actions available on the particular resource.
Often, only a subset of these actions is actually permitted.

Authorization scopes:: Authorization scopes is simply a set of all available actions on all the different resource types. When defining a new resource,  scopes are added from the set of all scopes.

Policies:: Policies are rules that use criteria to match a list of accounts. Policies can match service accounts based on client id or roles, or user accounts based on username, groups, or roles.

Permissions:: Permissions grant a subset of authorization scopes on a specific resource definition to a set of users.

> == Mapping Keycloak Authorization Services to Kafka Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Mapping Keycloak Authorization Services to the Kafka authorization model
```

  --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config=/tmp/config.properties
----

.Changing the topic configuration

To change the topic configuration the `Describe` and `Alter` permissions are required on the topic.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --alter --topic my-topic --partitions 2 \
  --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config=/tmp/config.properties
----

.Displaying the Kafka broker configuration

To be able to use `kafka-configs.sh` to get the broker configuration, `DescribeConfigs` permission is required on the `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-configs.sh --entity-type brokers --entity-name 0 --describe --all \
  --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config=/tmp/config.properties
----

.Changing the Kafka broker configuration

To change the Kafka broker configuration the 'DescribeConfigs', and `AlterConfigs` permissions are required on `Cluster:kafka-cluster`.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-configs --entity-type brokers --entity-name 0 --alter --add-config log.cleaner.threads=2 \
  --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config=/tmp/config.properties
----

> .Deleting the topic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Deleting a topic
```

To delete the topic the `Describe`, and `Delete` permissions are required on the topic.

[source,shell]
----
bin/kafka-topics.sh --delete --topic my-topic \
  --bootstrap-server my-cluster-kafka-bootstrap:9092 --command-config=/tmp/config.properties
----

> .Selecting the leader

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Selecting a leader partition
```
